this is sbs news in easy english i'm
peggy giacomelos anthony albanese has
not ruled out a formal apology to french
president emmanuel macron over the
submarine contract deal that was
cancelled at short notice by the
previous government
the prime minister will have a
one-on-one meeting with mr macron in
paris where he will seek to repair the
relationship damaged in the wake of the
contract cancelled mr albinisi says
their private conversations will not be
made public what i want to do though is
to make sure that we can look forward
look forward in a way that builds a
relationship to what it should be
it should be a relationship in which we
can rely upon each other as we have for
a long period of time
and in which we can trust each other and
mutually benefit uh from building that
relationship covert related payments
have ended as a new financial year
begins federal health minister mark
butler says anyone who is infected with
the coronavirus must still follow
directions to isolate at home for a week
but pandemic leaf payments will no
longer be paid mr butler says the
federal government does not have a
budget to continue funding what were
intended as emergency payments
at least 14 people have been killed and
more than 30 others are missing after a
massive mudslide in northeast india
disaster response workers and locals are
trying to rescue those who remain buried
under the debris the mudslide is thought
to have been caused by rain following
weeks of heavy downpours across india
and the neighbouring nation of
bangladesh
around 200 people have been killed in
downpours and mudslides in india's north
east and in pakistan in recent weeks
at least 30 people are still missing and
one person has died after the small boat
they were in sank off the coast of libya
doctors without borders
says a rescued ship managed to rescue
around 70 people including some women
and children
but a pregnant woman later died and
others remain unaccounted for
the new south wales government says it's
no closer to ending a dispute
over the state's new korean-built train
fleet with the state's rail union the
union is continuing strike action today
making only 30 of sydney's trains
available after talks with transport
authorities broke down on thursday a
draft government proposal to make more
than
260 million dollars worth of safety
changes
has done little to get the trains back
on tracks
the union says it wants a formal deal in
writing
tram and bus union state secretary alex
classens says the rtbu has been pushing
for action for a long time
we had a promise from a previous
transport minister before the last state
election before the last enterprise
agreement we've had promise after
promise backflip after backflip reneging
after reneging and yet again the goal
posts have moved we've got a government
that sits a government minister that
sits there and makes a promise and then
five minutes later somebody else is
changing the ground rules so there's a
tug of war going on inside government
we're not sure who's coming out on top
but it would appear to be that it's not
david elliot queensland's police force
are changing their age requirements for
new recruits
the minimum application age has been
lowered from 18 to 17 in a bid to get
more people to sign up to the service
police commissioner katarina carroll has
told channel 7 the change has been made
so that teenage school leavers can apply
early and be ready to start work once
they turn 18. it will be the case that
they we want them here at 18 they will
be out in the road at 18 and a half what
i want to do today is to encourage
every 17 year old in queensland to apply
for the queensland police service and
that's sbs news in easy english
[Music]
welcome to sbs news in easy english i'm
gareth borum
thousands of people in new south wales
have been told to evacuate or get ready
to leave their homes
as heavy rain continues to cause
flooding across large parts of the state
the state emergency service responded to
hundreds of requests for help overnight
and performed more than a hundred flood
rescues across the illawarra
blue mountains
sydney metropolitan hunter and central
coast districts
premier dominic pereta has urged the
public to follow safety instructions
please uh when you say this every flood
event
please don't drive through flood waters
once again we don't say that for the
sake of it we say that to keep you safe
and me
after every flood event we have a number
of flood rescues
and sometimes deaths that take place
because people don't follow that
instruction and they drive through flood
waters people drive through flood waters
because they can't see the depth of the
road beneath they don't that you cannot
appreciate how deep that water is a
rescue attempt is also being organized
for the crew aboard a bulk cargo ship
that has lost power off the coast south
of sydney
prime minister anthony albanese has
announced more sanctions on russia and
more military aid for ukraine
after visiting the war-torn country
after touring destroyed towns near kiev
with ukrainian president vladimir
zelensky
mr albanese pledged almost 100 million
dollars
in further military assistance
this includes 14 armored personnel
carriers and 20 bushmaster protected
mobility vehicles
they'll also be another 8.7 million
dollars to help upgrade border
management equipment and cyber security
measures mr albanese says it brings
australia's total military assistance to
ukraine
to more than
380 million dollars in bush today i saw
clear evidence of a war crime people
need to be held to account for their
actions australia stands ready to
continue to support
the government and the people of ukraine
for as long as it takes for ukraine to
emerge victorious in defense of your
national sovereignty
and your homeland
because you are fighting for
the international rule of law
australia's first truth-telling
commission
has requested a two-year extension
to deliver its final report
as it moves to focus on modern
injustices against indigenous people
to mark nadoc week
victoria's yaruk justice commission has
released its interim report
after meeting with
174 local elders
across the state
and another seven in melbourne based
public hearings
while too soon to make findings and
recommendations the inquiry has asked
victorian governor linda dessau
to extend the due date for its final
report from mid-2024
to
mid-2026
and sign off on additional resources
the french ambassador to australia says
a free trade agreement between australia
and the european union is now on the
cards
thanks to the federal government's
commitment to tackle climate change
while such a deal is unlikely to be
signed before 2023
the new australian government's approach
has been welcomed by members of the eu
french ambassador jean-pierre tebow
describes the relationship under prime
minister anthony albanese
as a complete new arena of cooperation
between france and australia
he welcomed australia's pledge to cut
greenhouse gas emissions by 43
on 2005 levels by 2030
to sport and in tennis
one of wimbledon's greatest champions
has marked the hundredth anniversary of
centre court by qualifying for another
quarter final
making the last eight for the 13th time
in his career
the six-time title holder novak djokovic
will meet one of the game's rising stars
twenty-year-old italian yannick sinner
very tough i mean i've never faced him
before and he's kind of a new face on
the tour and
he has won his first atp match actually
on the tournament that he has won few
weeks ago in his in his country
um you know beating players that are
from top five top ten in the world so
he was on the streak on this surface and
i knew that
you know it wasn't going to be easy you
know i'm gareth balor
this is sbs news in easy english welcome
to sbs news in easy english
i'm greg dyat
thousands of homes have been left
without electricity in new south wales
because of the latest flooding
some locations have received up to 800
millimeters of rain
in four days
emergency management minister steph cook
says the rain will soon ease
but the emergency
is far from over we're not quite through
it yet we've got major flooding heights
still on a number of river systems
a cargo ship
that lost power off the new south wales
coast
in heavy seas
is now anchored
south of port botany
after a long rescue operation
involving three tugboats
the state's port authority
says the captain and crew
of the portland bay
had been through a very challenging 24
hours
but the situation
is under control
the reserve bank is expected to increase
interest rates today
there are predictions the rate will rise
to
1.35 per cent
the new south wales government
says people need to get their covert 19
booster vaccination
only 68 percent of the population has
had three doses
health minister brad hazard
says three doses are needed
to provide proper protection ask your
mates have you had the full days because
if you do you're going to be a lot safer
you're going to
have far less likelihood of getting
really ill and far less likelihood
of dying
some of australia's states and
territories
are considering reintroducing the
requirement
to wear a mask
because of rising covert 19
case numbers
six people have been killed in another
mass shooting
in the united states
a gunman used a high-powered rifle
to shoot people
taking part in an american independence
day parade in chicago
at least two dozen people are injured
illinois governor
j
b pritzker
says
he's angry
i'm furious i'm furious that yet more
innocent lives were taken by gun
violence
i'm furious that their loved ones are
forever broken
by what took place today
protests have erupted in the united
states
following the release of police body cam
footage
showing the police
shooting an unarmed african-american man
more than 60 times
25 year old jalen walker
was killed in a hail of gunfire
in akron ohio
when police chased him
after a traffic stop
spanish police
say they have seized three underwater
drones
built to smuggle drugs across the sea
from morocco
the unmanned drones
are apparently capable of carrying up to
200 kilograms of cargo
eight people have been arrested
a new world vision report
says a mental health crisis looms
for ukrainian children
because of the devastating long-term
impacts of the war
data shows the ukraine war
is scouring the mental health
of a generation of children
with up to
1.5 million children
facing anxiety
and depression
i'm great diet
and that's sbs news in easy english
welcome to sbs news in easy english
i'm greg dyat
new south wales premier dominic perite
says the state's flood emergency
is far from over
it's the fourth major flood event
for residents of the hawkesbury region
north of
sydney flood disaster recovery payments
will be available from tomorrow
they will include one thousand dollars
for every eligible adult
and four hundred dollars
for every child
across the 23
local government areas
impacted so far
mr pereta says it's been a difficult
couple of years
many of the areas particularly that
we're seeing in the hawkesbury open also
in south west
but obviously particularly in the
hawkesbury nepean area there's been
flood event after flood event many
people are tired
a hong kong cargo ship
stranded in waters off sydney
will be towed into port botany
by the end of the day
following an order by the maritime
authority
the 170 metre ship
and its 21 crew members
have been floating off the coast
just south of the city
since the ship's engines failed
australia
is expected to follow other parts of the
world
in expanding eligibility
for a fourth
covert 19
vaccine dose
to the wider population
prime minister anthony albanese
says the immunization experts
will look at available evidence
before making a recommendation
the australian technical advisory group
on immunization
is expected to discuss the benefits
of expanding the fourth dose eligibility
at their meeting
today
victoria has extended its pandemic
declaration
by three months
health experts are also considering
whether to reintroduce mask mandates
or introduce a second booster
to curb
covert 19 cases
premier daniel andrews
says he is satisfied covert 19
continues to pose a serious risk
to public health throughout the state
new zealand prime minister jacinda
ardern
will fly out of sydney
after a visit to strengthen trade
tourism and security ties
following two days of meetings and
speaking arrangements in melbourne
ms ardern is scheduled to appear
at several tourism
and business events in sydney
she says her five-day trip across the
tasman
is a way to reconnect new zealand
after largely closing itself off to the
world
during the covert 19 pandemic the
suspected shooter
at an independence day parade
near the u.s city of chicago
has been charged with seven counts of
murder
21 year old robert e cremo
is accused of firing over 70 rounds from
a roof
into a crowd of people
during 4th of july
celebrations killing seven people
and injuring dozens of others
illinois state attorney
eric reinhardt
says the suspect faces more charges in
coming days
these are just the first of many charges
that will be filed against mr cremo i
want to emphasize that there will be
more charges
nick curios will appear in court next
month
accused of assaulting a former
girlfriend last december
twenty-seven-year-old curios
will appear in the act magistrates court
on the 2nd of august
facing one charge of common assault
i'm greg dyat
and that's sbs news
in easy english
[Music]
welcome to sbs news in easy english i'm
philippa harrisburg
more people are to become eligible for a
fourth dose of a covid19 vaccine
australia's leading immunization body
has updated its vaccination advice
recommending people over 50 receive a
second booster shot
they'll be eligible from monday
people aged between 30 and 49 years old
will also be able to have a fourth dose
if they choose to
the time between vaccine doses will also
be reduced from four months to three
months
the decision by the australian technical
advisory group on immunization comes
amid rising numbers of virus cases
foreign minister penny wong says she's
open to meeting her chinese counterpart
on the sidelines of the g20 summit
the event is about to start in indonesia
miss wong says china has to be willing
to repair relations with australia
we believe it would be in china and
australia's interests for this
relationship it's a relationship to be
stabilized
an australian foreign minister hasn't
met a chinese foreign minister since
2019.
the nation's defence ministers recently
met in singapore the highest level
ministerial contact between the nations
in three years
new zealand's prime minister says
australia and new zealand must remember
the sovereignty and independence of
pacific nations when they choose to
engage with other countries
jacinda ardern is visiting australia
ahead of next week's pacific islands
forum
china's growing influence in the region
is expected to be discussed at the event
ms ardern says nations in the
indo-pacific should set their own
priorities free from force or persuasion
recovery efforts are beginning in some
flood affected communities in new south
wales
rain has eased in sydney and the central
coast but authorities say the threat of
flooding remains
for tens of thousands of people in areas
including the hunter valley and the mid
north coast
fifty flood rescues were carried out
overnight
new south wales minister for emergency
services steph cook
says people should take care when they
return home
britain's prime minister is facing
growing calls to resign
more than 40 people have quit their
government positions
saying they've lost faith in the
conservative party led by boris johnson
his government has been beset by a
series of scandals
recently he apologized after appointing
a politician to a role involving
pastoral care not recalling the minister
had been the subject of sexual
misconduct complaints
australia has recorded a record trade
surplus of nearly 16 billion dollars
a rise in exports of coal and other
mineral fuels contributed to the surplus
in may imports rose by 2.3 billion
dollars led by fuels and lubricants
meanwhile
new job advertisements have declined for
the first time since december
despite the 2.1 percent fall in june
job ads are still almost 72 percent
above pre-pandemic levels
over 400 prisoners are missing in
nigeria
following a raid on a prison
authorities say four inmates a security
guard and several attackers were killed
in the attack on a prison in the capital
abuja
islamic state has claimed responsibility
in sport the hockeyroos have made it
through to the fih world cup
quarterfinals
the australian women's team beat south
africa 2-1 in spain
it was two-time olympian mariah williams
100th gain
the wiradjuri woman says she's proud to
achieve the milestone
during nadoc week
in tennis nick curios has reached the
semi-final at wimbledon for the first
time in his career
the australian defeated chile's
christian garan in the quarterfinals the
27 year old faces rafael nadal next
i'm philippa carrisbrook
this is sbs news in easy english
[Music]
welcome to sbs news in easy english i'm
philippa carrisburg
former japanese prime minister shinzo
abe has reportedly been taken to
hospital after being shot while
delivering a speech
local media reports gunshots were heard
at the scene in the city of nara before
mr abe collapsed bleeding
koyoda news reports he was unconscious
and unresponsive
local station mbs says he was in cardiac
arrest
a male suspect has been detained at the
scene
new zealanders living in australia could
be given voting rights and more ways to
permanent residency
the matters been discussed by prime
minister anthony albanici and new
zealand's leader jacinda ardern
mr albanesi says the countries need to
work towards more seamless transitions
for citizens
we don't want people to be temporary
residents forever and what we'll do is
we'll work on ways of a pathway to
citizenship the leaders also discussed
china's presence in the pacific region
ms ardern says pacific nations shouldn't
be forced to pick a side between china
and the west it should be the pacific
priorities first and foremost they
should be free of coercion
britain's prime minister boris johnson
has resigned a race to replace him has
begun mr johnson says he will stay on
until a successor is found
it's unclear how long that will take
i want you to know how sad i am
to be giving up
the best job in the world
the themes the breaks thank you all very
much prime minister anthony albanici
says his government will work with
whoever is chosen to replace mr johnson
he says the relationship between
australia and britain will remain strong
flooding in parts of the hunter region
in new south wales is reaching record
levels
there are over 60 evacuation orders in
place
almost 40 000 people are affected
residents are returning home in some
areas
they're being told to be cautious as
they clean up
payments have been extended to six more
local government areas
to the united states
and the former police officer convicted
of murdering black man george floyd has
been sentenced for another crime derek
chauvin is serving a 22-year jail
sentence for killing mr floyd during an
arrest
the 46 year old has now been sentenced
to over 20 years in prison for civil
rights violations the sentences will run
at the same time
the australian governments introduced a
new code of conduct for ministers and
their staff
the code will require ministers to sell
any shares they own directly
ministers will be able to have shares in
superannuation and other managed funds
they will not be allowed to have a blind
trust arrangement where funds come from
unknown sources
prime minister anthony albanesi says he
wants australians to have confidence in
the people they elect
victoria police are introducing a new
reporting tool it aims to reduce street
harassment
the text based service called stop it
allows people to report their
experiences
plan international australia says around
80 percent of women have experienced
street harassment
the women's equality organization says
it's one of the biggest dangers facing
young women
in sport nick curios has progressed to
the final of wimbledon
it follows the withdrawal of rafael
nadal from their upcoming semi-final due
to injury the spaniard has a painful
abdominal injury
curios has wished the player a swift
recovery
i'm philippa carrisbrook
this is sbs news in easy english
[Music]